Hi everyone, so this is the final workshop of the first day of PyData conference and
thank you for sticking with us so long. We are gathered here today to attend the workshop of
Thijs, Michael and Jeroen. They talk more about visualization and plotnine but
so yeah, so thank you so much for coming here all three of you and we're excited.
Thank you. You might need it later for Michael's part. Okay, great. Yeah, thank you for the introduction and thanks to you for joining us today at this plotnine tutorial.
In the next hour and a half, I won't be able to cover everything there is to learn about this
wonderful data visualization package but at least I'll be able to cover the most essential concepts
and provide you with a toolbox that you can use so that after this tutorial you'll be able to
produce data visualizations based on your own data using plotnine. So I'm very excited. I've
been using this package for a long time already and it seems that it doesn't really get the attention
it deserves. So again, I'm really happy that you took this chance to learn more about it.
My name is Jeroen and I am accompanied today by two lovely assistants, Thijs and Michael.
So if you have any questions regarding your setup in the beginning or later on as we do the exercises
then yeah, you can ask them for help. If there is anything in general, then please ask away as
well. I really encourage you to ask questions. I have more than enough material for this hour
and a half but I think it would be just so much more fun if you also would ask questions. So let's
get started. So for today, what I have in mind is let's first establish that you're at the right
tutorial right now or that you're watching the right YouTube video.
So I'll be showing you some examples of what you can create using plotnine.
Then a little bit about the importance of data visualizations. It's all too often that I see
people working with data and never take the opportunity to actually look what's inside
there. They immediately go from raw data to clean data and then machine learning model.
So plotnine in a nutshell, what are some of its basic features, the concepts that you need
to understand because there is a learning curve associated with plotnine. But once you do have that
dialed in, then you'll be able to produce beautiful data visualizations.
I'll also provide you with resources that you can use not only for the exercises in this tutorial
but also afterwards when you want to visualize your own data. And then as a bonus,
we have Michael to talk a little bit about the package that he has co-created,
Great Tables, which is also a form of data visualization but then still different enough
to warrant a separate package. So that should be exciting.
All right, so I do encourage you to follow along and to do the exercises for this.
You of course need to set up everything. You can go to the GitHub repository that we've set up
to scan this QR code. You can go to the GitHub repository. There's also a link in the description
on the PyData website. And then you have two options. You can either use POSI Cloud
or you set up things locally. We've provided instructions to use UE, but if you have a
different method of installing things, then that's of course fine. The two main packages
that we'll be using today are of course plotnine and then also a little bit of Polars to do some
light data ranking. If you don't know any Polars, that is okay. That's not the focus of this
workshop. So is this tutorial right for you? Let me show you a couple of examples, a couple of
data visualizations that have been created using plotnine. Here's a set area chart.
Here's an annotated scatterplot. It doesn't always have to be this fancy. This is a heat map
that I pulled from plotnine's documentation. Here's a line graph where we highlight the Polars
package. These are the number of GitHub stars that these packages have amassed over time.
And now is actually also a good time to do some advertising because
Thijs and I, we are very close to finishing our book, Python Polars, the Definitive Guide, which
should come out February next year. And in that book, there are also some visualizations. One of
them is this based on data from Citibike. And that's actually also the same data that you'll be
using during the exercises. Here's an animation. It doesn't really matter what this animation is
about. We're applying some dimensionality reduction on a high dimensional data set.
What really matters is that it's an animation created using plotnine.
And here's an example of a great table using greattables.
Again, if there are any questions, feel free to ask them. I love questions.
They say, what would you visualize? What would you do this in person? A few words.
Maybe you're already convinced. For those who have not yet seen this data set,
these are four data sets, each consisting of 11 data points. And if you were to compute some basic
descriptive statistics, you'll find here on the right that they all have the same values.
And then you might be inclined, well, these are the same data sets,
until you actually visualize them. These are four different data sets. And this
data visualization, you guessed it, has been created using plotnine.
And so this is, I believe, the best argument for why it's important to visualize your data.
And only that way, you could really get some insights into the underlying structure.
And this is the corresponding code that you would need in order to create this data visualization.
And this is quite large. I can imagine that this is quite overwhelming, quite intimidating.
It's quite a lot of code.
Lots of functions in there that you've not seen before.
You may guess a couple of things, what each function is trying to do.
But what I hope to achieve in this tutorial is that you'll be able to look at this code and say,
OK, I know what's going on. And not only that, that you're also able to come up with this yourself.
And so it's also good to know that I didn't start with this. Of course, when you're developing
software, you never just type it out in one go, right? This is an iterative process.
So what you see here is almost that same data visualization, but then only the
ascensions. So this is created using only four lines of code. Now that's a lot less, right?
That's comforting to know. And that's one of the strengths of POT9 is that you can easily create
these ad hoc data visualizations fairly quickly. And then once you have that, you can iterate on
that and then refine your visualization, make it ready for publication.
All right, so what is this POT9? Well, it's a Python package created by Hasan Kedrige.
He now works at Posit. And it's based on an R package called ggplot2, created by
Hallie Winkum a long time ago. So POT9 is stable. I've been using it for at least five years.
But it's just not as complete yet. And it doesn't have the same ecosystem of plugins that ggplot2
has. Still, I'm certain that you'll be able to create about 95% of all the visualizations that
you do want to create. There are some subtle syntax differences between ggplot2 and POT9
because, well, one is an R package and the other is a Python package, right? And these languages,
they're not the same. So still, the API is very consistent. So we can use a lot of the resources
that have been created for ggplot2. ggplot2 has been around for over 12 years.
We have cheat sheets, we have a gazillion blog posts, plenty of examples.
And with just a few tricks, we can actually use all that for our own purposes when we're creating
a visualization using Python and POT9.
So here are some of the concepts that I think are important for you to grasp. Like I said,
there is a learning curve. It will take some time, but there's a reason for that.
The name ggplot, or the two g's, they don't stand for good game. They stand for the grammar of
graphics. And this implies that there is some structure to this, some grammar. You see, all
these examples that I've shown you in the beginning, they look very different, but they
actually have, well, they've been built using the same grammar. They share a lot of structure to
them. There's a certain language to create this. Okay, we'll go over each of these concepts one
by one. And I also have some exercises to see if it all sticks, so you can apply those concepts
to that city bike data. And here's the first one. Your data. Your data can come in in various
formats. And generally speaking, you want your data to be in a tidy format. Now, I don't have
time now to cover what that means, but in practice, it's usually a long data frame is good,
and a wide data frame is bad. Yeah? So you can imagine that those 44 data points of the Anscombe
Quartet can be represented in multiple ways. On the left, we have a long representation,
where each row is one data point. And on the right, we have, well, we only have 11 rows.
And then we have, well, we need more columns, because the data sets, right, these four data
sets there may not be next to each other. Yeah? The long representation is good, because what
plot nine does, it will turn every row into a thing that appears in your data visualization.
This is known as a geometry. So once you have your data, you can start creating a data visualization.
Now, the package is called plot nine, right? I think I've told you that. But the function that
you need to use in order to get started is still called ggplot. Yeah? Don't ask me why.
But I think, well, if you do want, let's say you did want to ask me why. I think it is because
Hassan really wanted to be consistent with ggplot's two API, right? So ggplot.
Here, we specify two arguments. First one is the data frame. And this can be a polars data frame,
but it can also be a pandas data frame, right? Under the hood, it is still being converted to
a pandas data frame. Now, in practice, that's totally fine. You don't have to worry about this.
But all this to say that you don't really need to know polars in order to use plot nine. It is,
of course, helpful if you are able to do some data wrangling in Python using a data frame library.
So first argument is the data frame. And this second argument, it may look a little bit
strange at first. We use this AES function, which is short for aesthetics. And what we do here is we
map the columns that we have in our data to aesthetics, right? You can view aesthetics as
properties of the geometry that you're about to use. So you can imagine that in this case,
we're using a point. Function geom point will create a new layer that creates a point for every
row in your data frame. Now, what are the essential aesthetics or properties of a point?
Well, it should have a location, right? X and Y. And this is actually, I could have improved
this example because what I've left implicit here is the names of the aesthetics, right? The names
of the aesthetics are X and Y. And the column names in our data frame also X and Y. So it's
actually a bad example. But hey, that's the way it is. You'll get used to it. And you can leave
out those two arguments. If you want to map any additional columns to additional aesthetics,
then you need to specify them. For example, if you want to change the color of each point.
But this is the essence of plotline. You get some data, you specify which columns should map onto
which aesthetics, and then you specify geometry. In this case, we're creating a scatterplot using
the geom point function, but it could also have been a line graph, a box plot, an area chart,
you name it. Okay, so let's do some exercise, right? For the exercises, I can recommend that
you check out the resources. The resources are, well, they're in various places. They're in the
presentation themselves, right, if you have that open. But also, if you have the notebook, exercises.ipy.me
You can also see some resources here. So the plotline documentation, there's a cheat sheet,
and I'll show that in a moment. And there's also a link to heuristics for when you want to convert
existing ggplot code to plotline code, right, from R to Python.
Okay, so I'll give you some time, right, let's say five minutes. You try it for yourself first.
If you're stuck, you can look at some hints. I've provided some hints. If you're still stuck,
well, feel free to ask either Thanks or Michael for help. And if you're really stuck or you can't
be bothered to ask questions, or you just want to know the answer, then I've provided that as well.
Or if you've come up with an answer, you can of course check whether it was right.
Yeah, I'm actually not sure, again, where it is. I think this one goes to the repository,
this QR code. It's either the repository or this. Yeah, that's probably it.
Before we do this, are there any questions in general, right? Plotline, it's clear?
All right. Then, and again, if you do have any questions specific to your setup,
feel free to ask. So, yeah, before you then actually begin, I know you're eager to get
started, but then let me quickly show you, for example, what the ggplot is. Yeah, it's very
dense. I'm not expecting you to be able to read this, but if you click the link, you will navigate
to a PDF, a two-page PDF that contains pretty much everything there is to know about ggplot2.
And then, using some heuristics, you can convert the R code to Python code. And it sounds like
it's a big deal, but it's actually replacing periods with underscores, right? Because in
Python, you cannot have periods as part of the name of a function. Or it's that all the column
names in Python need to be quoted. In R, that's not necessary. So I do recommend that you check
out this cheat sheet. Then here's an example of some R code, right? Four lines of code,
and what the corresponding Python code looks like.
Okay, I admit that what I did there with the pause and the backslash, I'm no longer using that style,
actually. But I do recommend that you put these multiple functions, which are added together using
the pause operator, I recommend that you put each of them on a separate line. What I do these days,
I wrap them in parentheses, so that you don't need that backslash there anymore.
Yeah, so it's similar enough. And if you click on that link down there below,
you navigate to a blog post that I created a while ago, which lists all the uses. You'll be
able to figure it out, I'm sure. Okay, then. Unless there are no questions. Oh, yes.
So I see that aesthetics, that function is being used in several places. What are the
expected arguments inside to be brought as a function? Aesthetic is one of the arguments,
and then I thought, you can go to the previous slide. In your previous example,
inside your point also, you can have an aesthetic function argument. Good point.
Alright, so to summarize your question, we see here in this example that the function AES is
used multiple times. It's used as part of the ggplot function, where we're starting a new
data visualization, but then also inside the geom point function.
And what the short of it is, is that you can override or expand on the mapping that you do.
Alright, so essentially if you combine these two AES methods together, you'd say what you get is
that the x aesthetic, x value, is based on this one, the displacement column. Y is based on the
hwy highway column, and the color of each point is based on the class column of each row.
And the reason we're specifying it here on the geom point level is because we only want to
influence those points. We don't want to influence that line that we see down there,
which is created using the geom smooth function. It's a very good question, and it's actually my
bad that I've already introduced this in the beginning, because this is one of the concepts
that I will cover later on. But I do hope that it is somewhat clear at this point. But we will
come back to that. Thank you. Any other questions?
So, do you want it to use from plotline import star, or sometimes you try to not do that?
Yeah, alright. Fantastic question. The question was, I see here, from plotline import star.
What's up with that? Okay, you didn't phrase it like that, but I can imagine that a lot of people
are thinking, okay, this is just not done. And I agree, right? When you're developing software,
you want your namespace to be clean, right? When you import things like this, everything gets in
your little namespace, and that's not a good practice. And for software, I agree with that.
When you're working inside a notebook, and you are experimenting, you're experiencing ad hoc
data visualizations, this is my preferred method of importing everything from plotline,
because then it's just a lot less typing. It feels more like the R way of working, and that's
what I used to do in another life. But if you do want to import plotline neatly, then what is often
done is that plotline gets imported as P9. Just like Polars often gets imported as PL,
or NumPy gets imported as NP, the convention for importing plotline then would be P9.
Yeah, thank you for that question.
All right, what shall we do? You can get started with exercise one.
Let's start with five minutes.
Let's see how far you get. And again, don't hesitate to ask any questions. Good luck!
All right, good. If you have any issues with plotline,
if you have any issues with Plotify, definitely let me know.
All right, two minutes left. Most exercises do have a bonus question, if you have time left.
And if you've solved that one, you're of course free to continue to the next exercise, if you like.
For those of you who are using Posit Cloud, I've noticed that the notebook gets rendered in such a way
that it's not really obvious that you can click on the words hints and answer.
And then also I wrote these up. So the bottom one, bit.ly slash plotline repo, should take you straight there.
So say you were having to type in GitHub address.
It's a little bit of slides.
You know, in all my enthusiasm, I totally forgot to tell you a little bit about the data set that you'll be using.
But since I heard no complaints, it appears that everybody is doing fine.
We're looking at a rather large data frame containing bike rides from City Bike,
which I can totally recommend if you're in New York City for a bit longer.
Do wear a helmet, though, in the city.
And we're focusing here, I'm doing a little bit of a filter here,
we're focusing on those trips which ended right here.
The bike station closest to the conference.
And only those that took less than an hour to complete.
But still, plenty of data.
And Plotline, by the way, has no problem plotting millions of data pieces.
It uses matplotlib under the hood, which is, of course, the OG data visualization package for Python.
And there's no limit, per se, on the number of data points.
Okay, so I do hope that you were able to have a practice.
Are there any questions?
Who was able to complete exercise 1?
May I have a show of hands?
Okay, that's about 95%.
So do let me know if there's anything I can clarify.
So what was the question again?
Yes, we want to have this basic scatterplot right here.
And this here is a much better example, because here I'm being explicit about which aesthetics I'm actually talking about.
X and Y.
And now the columns are also not named X and Y, they're called distance and duration.
I should have used this example in my slides.
Excellent. Let's continue.
Okay, the third concept.
So there are certain statistical transformations that you can do using PlotMine.
Think about grouping or counting things.
This is quite convenient.
So what I'm doing right here is I'm using the function geomhistograph.
And what's interesting to note is that I am not explicitly specifying this count column.
You see this here on the left.
Notice, by the way, that this is so natural to me.
Can we just appreciate for a second how many things PlotMine does for you out of the box?
You've got your limits all set up based on the data.
You've got your labels.
You've got default colors.
And so lots of legend.
Lots of sensible defaults.
And it is good to know that each of these can be overwritten.
You want the colors to be different.
You want the font to be different.
Everything.
But right now we're still creating these quick data visualizations.
So with geomhistogram, it's a bunch of bars.
But what is happening under the hood is that there's also some counting going on.
And so PlotMine creates this new column for us, count, which gets mapped to the y-aesthetic.
So it's a bit confusing, but notice that the y-column is actually mapped to the x-aesthetic.
Just to make things more confusing.
So this is conceptually what is going on under the hood.
You provide it with a data frame, but before PlotMine actually visualizes everything,
it furnishes us some, in this case, a group-by operation.
And this is optional.
When all the data that you're using for visualization is already in the data frame,
then this is optional.
And you are still free to do any of these aggregations yourself.
If you have prepared the data frame in such a way that it can be immediately used to create a histogram,
or a density plot, or a box plot, that works too.
Another exercise.
Was five minutes enough? Was it too much?
It was good. Okay, thank you.
Then let's do another five minutes.
I think for this one, three minutes is sufficient. It's not that big of a...
So let's do three minutes.
Because now you're already set up.
Okay.
Yes.
Okay, I believe that was about three minutes.
How did that go?
Who was able to fix this code snippet?
Excellent.
Okay, so that's not everybody.
If you're still working on this, of course, you're free to do so.
In the meantime, I'm going to continue with the tutorial.
Alright, yet another concept for part nine.
And this one, this is a tricky one.
So bear with me.
For each aesthetic...
Each aesthetic mapping, I should say,
there's this translation going on
from values in your data frame
to something that appears in your data visualization.
And there's not always...
There's almost never a one-to-one relationship.
Somehow, part nine has to convert those raw values into pixels.
So that's what this mapping is all about.
And this is influenced by many things.
So, relatively speaking,
when the x value in a data frame
related to a certain data,
related to a certain row, is higher,
the corresponding point in the data visualization
moves to the right.
But by how much?
That's determined by a number of things.
First of all, it's determined by, well,
where do we start this x-axis?
Does it start at zero?
And what is the end?
And what is the...
Is it linear?
Or is it on a log scale?
So, this can be influenced
using a collection of functions
that start with the word scale.
And there is a scale.
There are scales for every aesthetic out there.
So in this particular example,
what I've done is I have turned the x-axis
into a log scale.
Using the function scale underscore x underscore log 10.
And for the y-axis,
well, I kept the type of scale,
which is by default,
there's always a default,
and for x and y scales continuous,
I changed the limits.
So, by default,
those limits are based on the data,
on the lowest value and on the highest value,
and then some.
But you can apply those.
So here, I said, okay, now,
I absolutely want my y-axis to start at zero
and to end at 20.
But scales go beyond the location
of a point or of any geometry.
Like I said, there is a scale
for every aesthetic.
There's also color, right?
But mine has to translate raw data values
into some color.
And depending on the type of the column
and depending on what you want to convey,
this can be different.
What I've done here is
I've used a different, yeah, column map.
These come from the Brewer collection
of palettes, so to speak.
So these take some very particular arguments,
so the type and the palette.
And what you're doing here, then,
is you override the colors
that are being used for data sets.
This is, of course, a discrete column,
the quality of it.
But if you have a continuous value,
you might only use a gradient.
And also for the size,
it's a bit contrived in this example,
but it does help me make my point here
in that the size of each point
is also determined by the values
in the Y column.
So that's a little bit redundant,
because we're already using Y
for the Y axis.
So what I've done here is
I have said, okay,
the minimum value
that I am going to consider
in the raw data
that will determine the size
of each point is 5.
Right, so if the value of Y
is below that,
it gets the same size.
And same thing,
the upper limit is 10.
So the points are very, very small here,
but you might be able to see
that any data point,
and there are four of them,
that are 10,
that have a value of 10 or higher
on the Y axis,
all have the same size.
And the range there,
that's the second argument of this
scale size continuous function,
determines, okay, what is then
the actual size being used?
So how small should the smallest point be,
and how large should the largest point be?
So, conceptually speaking,
what we're doing here is
we're mapping raw data values
onto some aesthetic values,
and that translation,
that's what we're influencing right here.
So limits and range,
it differs a little bit per scale
on which arguments are being used,
but this is the case,
the range and limit is the case
for scale size continuous.
There is definitely consistency there.
Don't worry.
And this is, I found this at least to be
the toughest concept
to wrap my head around.
Any questions about this?
AUDIENCE MEMBER 3
When you are adding stuff,
do you need to calculate other stuff?
Like, this would be like a chain of operations,
where you just start with this operation,
and you don't really need to add.
Is it adding layers on top of it?
All right.
Yeah.
So to summarize your question,
what's up with that plus sign?
And this is, again, this is history,
because that's how R's ggplug does things.
This plus operator has been overloaded,
and nowadays,
if you're familiar with R and the tidyverse,
you use the pipe operator
to combine things.
And in Python, we're used to do method checking.
But since Hasan wanted to stay close
to the original API,
he used the plus operator.
And indeed, what you said, right?
You're adding layers,
but only certain functions add layers.
So those who start with geom add layers,
and there's also, there's a couple of others,
but that's outside the scope of this tutorial.
But everything else also gets added,
but it's not technically a layer
that you're then adding.
So conceptually, it's like method changing,
only a different syntax,
and I know that takes some getting used to.
But trust me, you will be able to get used to that,
just by using that.
Yeah.
Good question, thanks.
Okay.
Let's do another exercise.
Let me have a look here.
Yes, oh yes.
Look at these colors.
They're hideous.
Sorry, Hasan.
But these are the default colors, right?
We're using here, these are Boolean columns.
Yeah, and then by default, it's like red,
and this, it's a hideous blue.
But we can do better.
And of course, we're able to override
everything that we see.
So that is the purpose of this exercise.
Can you improve these colors?
By the way, the very first line of this
code snippet, of this code cell,
creates a new small data frame
that we're then using to...
Yeah.
To create the stacked bar chart over here.
Right, like this.
Oh, it's not even a Boolean column,
it's a categorical one.
Yeah.
Alright, couple of minutes
to turn this into a somewhat nicer looking
stacked bar chart.
Good luck.
Thank you.
Alright.
Yeah.
So, one of the bonus questions is that
you can also specify these colors manually
using hex codes.
But you can also specify color names.
And I kind of forgot what collection of
color names that you can use.
They might be just based on the ones
that you can use in R.
It's the matplotlib.
Oh, it's the matplotlib color names.
There's a list.
Yeah.
Oh, that's beautiful.
Thank you.
So people can get that
Levenspahn
that they need.
Nice.
Thank you, Michael.
You can use whatever color you like.
Thank you.
Everything's going over here.
Good.
That's already much better, isn't it?
I'm trying to see if I can figure out
the same colors that I can use.
Because it's kind of used to
color black and blue.
Oh, automatic.
Oh, does it?
Matplotlib does that?
Yes.
Oh, the colors.
Yeah, the colors.
C0, C1, C2.
Yeah.
There is also...
There was your question about,
or not a question, but more of a remark
on that matplotlib has color maps
that are friendly for people who are
color blind.
And is there a way to do that with black?
Yeah, so there is,
if I am not mistaken,
scale colored,
or scale filled,
depending on the geometry that you are using, right?
Cmap.
And I think that this
takes the name
of a matplotlib.
Matplotlib color map.
And Cmap underscore D is for a discrete color map.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Do you know what my main chance is?
Oh, I'm not sure.
I'll look it up.
Okay.
I think this is also a
redis.
That's being used by a poll here.
There's also a
Brewer has that nice
website with...
Oh, yes.
Color Brewer.
It's always a good one to show.
Yeah, if you, I mean,
Color Brewer,
those
collection of color maps
are pretty good
up to a certain number of categories.
And if you're dealing with more than, say,
9th and 11th,
it gets tricky anyway.
But here you can choose between different
sets
of color maps
depending on
the nature of your data.
Whether it is sequential,
divergent,
or qualitative.
These are the icons
by the export button.
It hasn't been proven
to be either friendly or unfriendly.
In critical questions.
Yeah.
And this is, of course,
something that you can really
lose yourself in.
Colors, of course,
play a very important role
in data visualization.
And, yeah,
you can spend a long time
on perfecting this.
But what I am, of course,
now most
concerned with
is the concept
of
using scales
in PlotMine.
Is that clear?
I have a question.
Thank you.
So,
you pick two values
for the colors.
Yeah.
And if you want to map
the values of the variable
to those two colors,
so that you are considering
you have multiple colors
in which classic
should be always green.
Okay?
Right.
And
if you only do values,
it will depend on
which one it will take first.
Sometimes I will want to say,
okay,
classic to green,
like a net.
Some other
plotting libraries
you have the fact that
you can map the value
of the variable
to the value of the color.
Yeah.
If I can summarize your question,
let me know if I got it wrong,
is that, okay,
how can you be certain
that a specific value
gets mapped to a specific color
and then specifically
for multiple
data visualization?
Yeah, I mean,
for one,
what I typically do
is I create
another column in my data frame
with the color name
or even perhaps a code.
And then you can use
the function scaleColorIdentity.
And then your aesthetic mapping
becomes color
or fill
equals
the name of the column
that you chose.
So it's color equals color.
Right?
So maybe it's cheating,
but you're embedding
visualization data
in your data frame.
But then at least,
well, I can be certain
that the mapping is always
the same.
But there's no API
like scaleColorManualIdentity.
On top of that,
you can tell also
the mapping
values of the color
and the name.
And it breaks.
I think it breaks in values.
Oh, so you're...
Yeah, so in this...
Right, so in this example here,
these are my favorite colors,
I'm using dark green and pink.
But then, of course,
it still matters
which value came first.
So,
one-offs.
Right?
If I were to do this programmatically,
I would probably
make sure that those names
or hex codes
are part of the data frame
itself.
And then,
you would not use
scaleFillManual,
but you would use
scaleFillIdentity.
Identity.
Yeah.
Does that answer your question?
Alright.
Okay.
The fifth concept
that you need to wrap your head around.
Layers and inheritance.
And we already had a question
related to this.
Remember,
we had a question
as in,
why do I see
the ADS function
being used
multiple times?
So,
first of all, layers.
Every geom function
creates a new layer.
And the order here matters.
The one you specify first
gets drawn first.
And,
the
inheritance part here
refers to
both the data
and the aesthetics mapping.
These are two things
that we can specify
in the ggplot function.
Our constructor, so to speak.
And when you specify them
at this top level,
then all the layers
will inherit both
the data and the aesthetics mapping.
And this is,
for a lot of cases,
this is quite convenient.
Right?
You don't need to specify
which data frame you want to use
for every layer separately.
But you can,
if you want to.
Sometimes you do want to use
a different data frame
for another layer.
Think about,
okay, so,
bear with me here,
but you have
a scatterplot.
Right?
With a couple of clusters.
And you also have some labels.
Some text.
And you want,
at the center
of each cluster,
to have a single label.
Now,
the labels need to come from
a separate data frame
that only has a few rows.
One row per cluster.
So you have to do some
some aggregation.
Or maybe even some clustering yourself.
But then you are able
to add a new layer
using geom text,
geom label.
Right?
Add those labels.
And say,
okay,
I don't want you to use
the default data set
that contains all the data points.
I want you to use this other
small data frame
which just contains
the labels
and the coordinates
where they should be put.
So that's for the data.
And then for the aesthetics,
same story.
Sometimes,
not every layer
has to have
every aesthetics mapping.
Coming back again to labels.
Right?
For a label,
you need to specify,
okay,
in which column
do we have the text?
Right?
And that's always specific,
that's very specific
for all the geometries,
text and labels.
So,
what I usually do is
I reuse
the AES function
and only add
that specific mapping.
Something that I haven't really included
in this presentation,
but,
I don't know,
I don't hear any questions about it,
but I do want to
point it out,
is this facet rep function.
I've already shown it a couple of times,
but I've never
really, you know,
explained it to you.
Well,
what this does,
it creates facets.
It creates these four panels,
one for each data set,
one for each unique value
in the data set column,
which is all
the Roman numerals
one through four.
And,
I think this is,
this really captures the idea
that you use
plotline in a declarative way.
Right?
You're not programming this
procedurally or anything.
You specify
what you want to visualize,
and then plotline
will figure out how to do it.
Okay, so related to this,
is it related?
It's related enough that I've
packed it into one exercise.
So,
this is the last concept.
There are,
so we've talked about these aesthetics, right?
Properties that
influence how a
geometry is being drawn.
Most of the time,
we want these to be based
on our data, right?
Because we're creating
data visualizations.
Sometimes you want things to be
static.
You want to
set a certain
aesthetic
to a particular value.
And the best term that I've come up,
I've been able to come up with,
is that they're
aesthetic-aesthetic.
Which, for example here,
all the points
have the same color.
This is not based on data.
Well, it could if I were
to have a separate column
that would all have the same value.
Usually, these are things that you tweak.
And the names for the aesthetics
remain the same.
Color,
fill,
even x and y,
but then you would have everything at the same location.
That's usually not
very helpful.
But,
if you want to do this,
then make sure that these
keyword-argument pairs,
such as fill equals dark orange,
and color equals sienna,
and size is three.
Okay, so we have here
three static aesthetics
in a row.
Make sure that they're not part of the
ADS function.
Yeah, that's a common pitfall.
However,
when an aesthetic
has to be based on data,
it needs to go inside
the ADS function.
Otherwise, you'll get an error.
Alright,
no questions.
Well then, let's see how you
will fare with this one.
With exercise four,
we're going to do
with exercise four,
related to layers and inheritance.
A couple minutes. Good luck.
And if there's time left,
if you've been going through all these exercises
in the past, you know, moments,
then feel free to continue
with exercise five,
which is, you know, you'll figure it out.
You can, you know,
spend as much time with it as you like.
This won't be a separate exercise
that we do in this tutorial,
but it's just so that you have
something to do if you have time left.
Okay.
Alright, here's how I solved it.
So,
you can use the same
geometry
multiple times.
And that's what we're doing right here.
Again, the order is important,
because we want those
few correct points to be, of course,
on top of
the other points.
Those points are actually being wrong
twice, but that's totally okay here.
And
I'm only overriding the
data argument.
And that means that this layer
also inherits the default
aesthetics mapping.
So you see that this is actually quite convenient.
We could have said
data equals trips
over here.
And we could have removed this one.
And I could have even removed
this part over here.
And it might be that because
I'm already using a keyword argument right there,
I need to use mapping.
Alright, still works.
Although this is
not advised, right, because now
all of a sudden things don't make sense anymore.
I'm flipping
the latitude and the longitude here
of the second layer.
But
in this case it's obvious,
which is a good thing.
So you
have a lot of flexibility
here.
Any questions about
using multiple layers
and this
inheritance of data
and the aesthetics mapping?
So the first layer
will draw the point black and then
you redraw it red, right?
Exactly. On top of those
will be drawn 18 points
because the second data frame
trips underscore long only has
18 rows.
I only bring this up because I believe
in you so strongly.
You believe in me that I can do the live coding?
Alright then, so that would be
so let me just then copy paste some.
Instead of creating
a filter here
what we're doing here
is
trips with columns
we're creating a new
column here
is long
and this is either going to be false
or it's going to be true.
We still have this large data frame
so at the very end
most of them will be false.
So let me just
overwrite this. Now
we don't need the second layer
over here.
Let me just
recover here a little bit.
It still works.
They're all black
because we're not
mapping anything to the
color aesthetic
but we could do that
by saying color is long.
Completely different colors, right?
Where we recognize
these hideous colors
can all be overwritten
but the advantage is
okay
I'm keeping everything in the same
data frame. You have less
code for column 9.
It scales to more than just two values.
So it's more scalable
and you actually get elections.
So Michael, thank you for that.
Yeah, was this
clear?
Exactly.
So if we say color equals
duration
Oh, it's because it's a time delta
massive error right there.
So we actually need
Usually I work a little bit cleaner
than this. With columns
let me just overwrite duration
equals
the duration
column. This is a special type
a duration type I believe
so I think it's
total seconds
Oh yeah, so it's part of the
namespace.
I'm so happy with my team
and my assistants today.
There we go.
This works. Duration, duration
Thank you for
that question.
It's great.
Coming back here
So we actually have
a bonus. We have some time left.
We have 15 minutes left according to
my timer.
And
let's first do that
and then after that, so about
10 minutes, 5-10 minutes
Michael can show
you a couple of things
about the great tables package
and afterwards we do some Q&A.
Right? Excellent.
Michael, could you please come up here?
So
Alright, thanks Jeroen.
Okay, so tables
Yeah, thanks.
I'm a giant fan of plot9
and more recently
I've been working on a sort of related area
which is kind of like
the step-cousin to
a plot, a table.
They're both a form of data visualization
but
it always seems like tables
are a little bit different, a little bit
funkier, so I'm excited to get into this.
So here's
this is what I mean by
I'll call this a display table
so this is a table that you might want to present
for publication
and notice that here we have a lot of
elements you'll find in plots
so like the
background's color
we actually have a small plot embedded
in the table
we have a lot of text information
percentages, things like that
so this could, parts of this could
be in a plot, but I think
the key to tables
and what distinguishes them from plots
often is that
there are a couple things
so one, a plot
usually has only a few
dimensions, so you use
a few columns and you might have
an x and y axis
you might have some color
but you're limited to a few dimensions
notice that tables
your values
are often shown as
columns, so you don't have to
have just an x or a y
you could actually show 5 or 10
different measures
side by side
so that's an important use case for a table
where plots tend to not work as well
the other
really valuable use case of a table
is that they often encode the
raw numbers
or something close to the raw values
so I don't know why I'm pointing
because I could also use the mouse
this is nice, I like mouse
so here
these are the percentages
plots, often times
plots are really good at showing you patterns
so they might show
two of these in the scatter plot
but it's hard to pull out the
raw numbers
so this
is the gist behind a table
good thing is tables tend to be very
compact, so they're really good for
metrics or
dashboards where people are really interested
in the raw numbers, you see this a lot
in sports, like basketball
or soccer
where you break down athletes and teams
I'm going to
very quickly run through
some of the elements of a table
so I'll say there are three key pieces
there's structure
formatting and style
and what I mean by structure is
things like a title
so notice that a data frame
doesn't have a title on it
so we put one over this table
so people can get the gist of what we're
displaying
we have column labels, so we've given nice
names to the columns
whereas data frames we tend to do things that are
easy to type
and then grouping rows, notice that
Manhattan, all rows in
Manhattan are grouped together
so this is a way to do a little bit of
natural grouping
for formatting
notice that the percentages
here have been cleaned up a little bit
so these are whole numbers
so that's often just to make it a little bit
easier to read and
pull information out of
the other type of formatting
we'll talk about
is a data prompt
so we changed, this was essentially a list
of data here, and we changed
those into small visualizations
so
formatted to make it quick to read
the last thing
is styling
so we made the background here
recolored it
so people can pull out trends
and styling is often
very similar to doing
things that happen in
clocks inside of a table
so you can emphasize trends
and patterns
tab F
I'm going to
try to just run this really fast
and then get it out of the way
I will note, I noticed
that I think
I think that
in the Posit
cloud
I think it
it just doesn't have enough resources
it's a little bit under resourced
so
what I'm going to do is I'm just going to grab
a specific week
so I'm going to grab like 7 parquet files
I think that we could have
beefed up these cloud
notebooks, but I noticed
it was kind of
patching out
so this is doing a little bit of data
analysis, prep everything
so here's a
data frame, this is kind of the raw data
notice this is like guts out
this is good for when you're analyzing
but you wouldn't want to show people this
and here's this list
you can do a nanoplot
and then I'll just
here's a GT
and here's the final
table if you're interested
the thing I'll note
here is
the key is all the structure pieces
they often start with tab
or calls
so this is for doing something to the table
formatting
notice these all start with
fmt
so it's quick to find all the ways to format
and
styling is a little more
all over the place, we have this thing called
data color, which is meant to really
easily fill in the background
on the table
and then there's another function called tab style
that does a lot of stuff
so that's just to show you the rough structure
of gray tables
and the types of tables
so
step cousin to plots
a little bit different and the key is often
when you want to access the raw data
or really compactly have a lot of
measures side by side
yeah
yeah you said
you use this
do you use this for populations?
yeah
if so how do you copy it from here to
I don't know, Linux?
so
the website gray tables
for gray tables
that's a website, we use a tool called cordo
if you go to cordo.org
Q-U-A-R
T-O
it's similar to like
how you would render a notebook
you can render it to like an html
or a pdf
or to the attacker types
so
we often use this
this is what the gray tables website is made in
just because it makes it easier to produce
but you could use whatever you use to render
a notebook
I know we're running out of time
so I'll turn it back
to you
thank you Mike
I'm a big fan of
gray tables
Thijs and I, we are actually
dedicating
a section to gray tables
in our upcoming book
so hey, let's just
wrap up this tutorial here
because we are
close to an hour and a half
you've been a great audience
I walked around
everybody was doing the exercises
lots of
great questions
and I feel that I have been able to
really
cover a lot of ground here
not everything yet
I skipped over
the fascinating part
theming
that's when you really make the step
from ad hoc
to publication ready
visualizations
my recommendation then is
if you're interested in this
try it out as soon as possible
and then also look into
the feed
there are plenty of resources at the end of this
presentation for you to continue
your learnings
I'm going to be around
and so is Thijs and Michael
for the rest of this conference
if you want to chat about anything
one more plug
Thijs and I are also giving a talk on Friday
about how we converted
a large codebase
from pandas to colabs
in which you will learn more about colabs
specifically
which we've used of course a little bit
in some data wrangling
now, one more time
are there any questions
at this point
that you would like to ask me or Michael
when it concerns gray tables
is it vectorized?
well, it uses matplotlib underneath it
it's rasterized
although matplotlib does have other
rendering attributes
you can do SVG
but it's not interactive
that's perhaps the only
downside
sometimes
depending on what you want to do
you want to be able to interact
you want to be able to zoom and pan
select things
if that's what you want
there are other packages out there
altair
or probably
static ones
alright then
thank you everybody for your time